Overview (#633)
rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide: src/overview.md

# Rust compiler Overview

This chapter is about the overall process of compiling a program -- how
everything fits together.

The rust compiler is special in two ways: it does things to your code that
other compilers don't do (e.g. borrow checking) and it has a lot of
unconventional implementation choices (e.g. queries). We will talk about these
in turn in this chapter, and in the rest of the guide, we will look at all the
individual pieces in more detail.

## What the compiler does to your code

So first, let's look at what the compiler does to your code. For now, we will
avoid mentioning how the compiler implements these steps except as needed;
we'll talk about that later.

**TODO: Would be great to have a diagram of this once we nail down the details...**

**TODO: someone else should confirm this vvv**

> - The compile process begins when a user writes a Rust source program in text and invokes the `rustc` compiler on it. The work that the compiler needs to perform is defined by command-line options. For example, it is possible to enable nightly features (`-Z` flags), perform `check`-only builds, or emit LLVM-IR rather than executable machine code. The `rustc` executable call may be indirect through the use of `cargo`.

Author: https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/659#discussion_r402821994

> Should we have a soft wrap here?

> Open question how we will format the entire document. Maybe this will become standard body copy with paragraphs rather than a bullet list?

Author: I think if we are going to do paragraphs, we should make them actually paragraphs, rather than bullets. But if we are going to do bullets, we should keep the, short.

Personally I'm ok with doing paragraphs.

Reviewer: > Personally I'm ok with doing paragraphs.

I like that idea too.  I think that we may be hitting lengths that are a bit too much for lists.

Author: One thing, though is that we should resolve all of the above comments first. Otherwise, github will mark them all as outdated.

Author: Will do this in a followup ( #320)

> - Command line argument parsing occurs in the [`librustc_driver`]. This crate defines the compile configuration that is requested by the user and passes it to the rest of the compilation process as a [`rustc_interface::Config`].

Reviewer 2: ``[`rustc_interface::Config`]`` isn't rendered as link.

- The raw Rust source text is analyzed by a low-level lexer located in [`librustc_lexer`]. At this stage, the source text is turned into a stream of atomic source code units known as _tokens_. (**TODO**: chrissimpkins - Maybe discuss Unicode handling during this stage?)

> - The token stream passes through a higher-level lexer located in [`librustc_parse`] to prepare for the next stage of the compile process. The [`StringReader`] struct is used at this stage to perform a set of validations and turn strings into interned symbols.

Author: https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/659#discussion_r402848391

> Did we define interning before? If not, maybe include a link to the chapter about interning?

Author: I don't think we have.

Author: Added a para about interning and arenas.

- (**TODO**: chrissimpkins - Expand info on parser) We then [_parse_ the stream of tokens][parser] to build an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).
  - macro expansion (**TODO** chrissimpkins)
  - ast validation (**TODO** chrissimpkins)
  - nameres (**TODO** chrissimpkins)
  - early linting (**TODO** chrissimpkins)

- We then [_parse_ the stream of tokens][parser] to build an Abstract Syntax
  Tree (AST).
- We then take the AST and [convert it to High-Level Intermediate
  Representation (HIR)][hir]. This is a compiler-friendly representation of the
  AST.  This involves a lot of desugaring of things like loops and `async fn`.
- We use the HIR to do [type inference]. This is the process of automatic
  detection of the type of an expression. **TODO: how `ty` module fits in
  here**
- **TODO: Maybe some other things are done here? I think initial type checking
  happens here? And trait solving?**
- The HIR is then [lowered to Mid-Level Intermediate Representation (MIR)][mir].

> - The MIR is used for [borrow checking].

Reviewer 2: This is not rendered as link.

work by enabling parallel compilation in `config.toml`. It's still early days,
but there are already some promising performance improvements.

### Bootstrapping

**TODO (or do we want such a section)?**

# Unresolved Questions

**TODO: find answers to these**

- Does LLVM ever do optimizations in debug builds?
- How do I explore phases of the compile process in my own sources (lexer,
  parser, HIR, etc)? - e.g., `cargo rustc -- -Zunpretty=hir-tree` allows you to
  view HIR representation
- What is the main source entry point for `X`?
- Where do phases diverge for cross-compilation to machine  code across
  different platforms?

# References

- Command line parsing
    - Guide: [The Rustc Driver and Interface](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/rustc-driver.html)
    - Driver definition: [`rustc_driver`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_driver/)
    - Main entry point: **TODO**
- Lexical Analysis: Lex the user program to a stream of tokens
    - Guide: [Lexing and Parsing](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/the-parser.html)
    - Lexer definition: [`librustc_lexer`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_lexer/index.html)

>     - Main entry point: **TODO**

Reviewer 3: I'm really unsure but it probably is [`rustc_lexer::tokenize`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_lexer/fn.tokenize.html).
```suggestion
    - Main entry point: [`rustc_lexer::tokenize`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_lexer/fn.tokenize.html)
```

Author: @chrissimpkins ?

Reviewer: I *think* so.  I am trying to track down the path from `rustc_interface` to the lexer calls.  https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/src/rustc_interface/interface.rs.html#207-215 ...

Reviewer: Note to self. See https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/633#discussion_r403515467

Reviewer: @petrochenkov Vadim, any guidance on the best lexer entry point for our `rustc` Overview docs?

Reviewer: Aleksey indicated that the lexer entry point is https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/39b62533c7f9d0581a6ea9b9fc2cc51f21c3b5b0/src/librustc_lexer/src/lib.rs#L246

- Parsing: Parse the stream of tokens to an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)
    - Guide: [Lexing and Parsing](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/the-parser.html)
    - Parser definition: [`librustc_parse`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/index.html)

>     - Main entry point: **TODO**

Reviewer 3: I believe this is [`rustc_parse::parse_in`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/fn.parse_in.html).
```suggestion
    - Main entry point: [`rustc_parse::parse_in`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/fn.parse_in.html)
```

Reviewer 4: No, that's a function that's primarily used for parsing the `TokenStream` inside an `Attribute`, and not for general parsing.

Author: @Centril Can you point to the correct entry point?

Reviewer 4: Well there are a few entry points depending on the situation. For example, the lib.rs file has a different entry point (called by a query in the rustc_interface) than parsing an outline module (called by expansion), and then there are black box parsers for macro fragments. Which do you want?

Author: Preferably all of them if possible.

Reviewer: Does `rustc_interface` call the parser which calls the lexer?  This seems to (maybe) be the case and is what I am expecting to find but I am having a tough time locating the connections beginning at `rustc_interface`.

Reviewer 4: > Preferably all of them if possible.

- Entry point for first file in crate is: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_interface/passes/fn.parse.html

- Entry point for outline module parsing is: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_expand/module/fn.parse_external_mod.html

- Entry point for macro fragments is: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_expand/mbe/macro_parser/fn.parse_nt.html (I might move this into the parser to reduce visibilities there.)

- There are more, but these are the most notable ones.

These lead into the parser crate itself, but all of them are outside.

> Does `rustc_interface` call the parser which calls the lexer? This seems to (maybe) be the case and is what I am expecting to find but I am having a tough time locating the connections beginning at `rustc_interface`.

The interface calls a glue function between the lexer and the parser that composes them together for convenience.

Reviewer: I added Mazdak's links in 5243c7a3f7bd1d0a7b85ee4247219f5581ce2e30 (#669)

Reviewer: I think that I have the first file in crate full call path worked out from `rustc_interface` -> `parser` entry point, including how the lexer is instantiated and what is called to return a `TokenStream` (it appears to be part of the `Parser` instantiation).  

I'll summarize this for the Overview in #669 and will add more detailed documentation in the Guide chapter.

Reviewer: @Centril I added an initial draft of Overview parser documentation in  https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/669/commits/79c19ab99818a9184e037dad0bb496eac4c0292f

This does not include information about macro expansion, AST validation, nameres, or early linting yet.  How detailed do you feel that we should dive into these topics in the overview?  Mention that they occur and then expand on them in the Guide chapter?

Reviewer 4: @chrissimpkins I'd just include the entry point in the overview and then call it a day; most of the additional stuff belongs in a page about the parser imo.

Reviewer: > @chrissimpkins I'd just include the entry point in the overview and then call it a day; most of the additional stuff belongs in a page about the parser imo.

Thank you! I will update it today and begin to move the other information over to the Guide chapter.

Reviewer: I think that I addressed this as you recommended in https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/669/commits/b3e75e8b7b32c71e7d97f2e98a262ea279cfed27

Author: @chrissimpkins I cherry-picked the commit with the entry points from your branch

Reviewer: > @chrissimpkins I cherry-picked the commit with the entry points from your branch

Ty!

    - AST definition: [`librustc_ast`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_ast/ast/index.html)
- The High Level Intermediate Representation (HIR)
    - Guide: [The HIR](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/hir.html)
    - Guide: [Identifiers in the HIR](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/hir.html#identifiers-in-the-hir)
    - Guide: [The HIR Map](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/hir.html#the-hir-map)
    - Guide: [Lowering AST to HIR](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/lowering.html)
    - How to view HIR representation for your code `cargo rustc -- -Zunpretty=hir-tree`
    - Rustc HIR definition: [`rustc_hir`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_hir/index.html)
    - Main entry point: **TODO**
- Type Inference
    - Guide: [Type Inference](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/type-inference.html)
    - Guide: [The ty Module: Representing Types](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/ty.html) (semantics)

>     - Main entry point: **TODO**

Reviewer 3: Reading the Guide, I think this is [`rustc_infer::infer::InferCtxtBuilder::enter`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_infer/infer/struct.InferCtxtBuilder.html#method.enter).
```suggestion
    - Main entry point: [`rustc_infer::infer::InferCtxtBuilder::enter`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_infer/infer/struct.InferCtxtBuilder.html#method.enter)
```

Author: @eddyb confirm?

Author: Actually, is the "entry point" just the `type_of` query?

Reviewer 5: `type_of` is usually the declared type, `typeck_tables_of` is the entry-point for type-checking *bodies* (e.g. those of functions and consts), and the `tcx.infer_ctxt().enter(...)` thing (you can't decouple those methods btw, although I wonder if they still need to be separate? we removed the `'tcx`/`'gcx` distinction so maybe the bug is fixed) is the entry-point for doing *inference* (which is something that type-checking does but it's also used elsewhere).

- The Mid Level Intermediate Representation (MIR)
    - Guide: [The MIR (Mid level IR)](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/mir/index.html)
    - Definition: [`librustc/mir`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/tree/master/src/librustc/mir)
    - Definition of source that manipulates the MIR: [`librustc_mir`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/tree/master/src/librustc_mir)
    - Main entry point: **TODO**
- The Borrow Checker
    - Guide: [MIR Borrow Check](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/borrow_check.html)
    - Definition: [`rustc_mir/borrow_check`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_mir/borrow_check/index.html)

>     - Main entry point: **TODO**

Reviewer 3: This is the [`mir_borrowck`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_mir/borrow_check/fn.mir_borrowck.html) query.

- MIR Optimizations
    - Guide: [MIR Optimizations](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/mir/optimizations.html)
    - Definition: [`rustc_mir/transform`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_mir/transform/index.html) **TODO: is this correct?**

>     - Main entry point: **TODO**

Reviewer 3: I think this is the [`optimized_mir`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_mir/transform/fn.optimized_mir.html) query.

- Code Generation
    - Guide: [Code Generation](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/codegen.html)
    - Guide: [Generating LLVM IR](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/codegen.html#generating-llvm-ir) - **TODO: this is not available yet**
    - Generating Machine Code from LLVM IR with LLVM - **TODO: reference?**
    - Main entry point MIR -> LLVM IR: **TODO**

>     - Main entry point LLVM IR -> Machine Code **TODO**

Reviewer 3: Is it [`rustc_codegen_ssa::base::codegen_crate`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_codegen_ssa/base/fn.codegen_crate.html)?
```suggestion
    - Main entry point LLVM IR -> Machine Code: [`rustc_codegen_ssa::base::codegen_crate`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_codegen_ssa/base/fn.codegen_crate.html)
```

Author: @bjorn3 can you confirm?

Author: Also, as I understand it, starting codegen also transitively causes monomorphization for the CGU and then generates LLVM IR from the collector's results.

Reviewer 2: > @bjorn3 can you confirm?

`rustc_codegen_ssa::base::codegen_crate` is responsible for calling the right functions to translate everything in a codegen unit to LLVM ir. It then starts a background thread for that codegen unit to optimize it and write the resulting object file. After all threads are started it returns. You then have to call [`rustc_codegen_ssa::back::write::OngoingCodegen::join`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_codegen_ssa/back/write/struct.OngoingCodegen.html#method.join) from [`rustc_codegen_ssa::traits::CodegenBackend::join_codegen](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_codegen_ssa/traits/trait.CodegenBackend.html#tymethod.join_codegen) to join all threads. That function then returns all compiled modules. This split exists to be able to free the `TyCtxt` before all codegen units are optimized and written, potentially reducing max RSS.

> Also, as I understand it, starting codegen also transitively causes monomorphization for the CGU and then generates LLVM IR from the collector's results.

Monomorphization happens lazily. Every time something part of the MIR (eg a statement, or a part of a statement) is codegened, `FunctionCx::monomorphize` is called on that part.

>   - Definition: [`rustc_mir/transform`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_mir/transform/index.html) **TODO: is this correct?**

Reviewer 2: Yes this is correct.

>   - Main entry point MIR -> LLVM IR: **TODO**

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/8926bb497d9b127eb318aea5aed0e745d8381591/src/librustc_codegen_llvm/base.rs#L129

Author: @bjorn3 Is that this: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_codegen_llvm/mono_item/enum.MonoItem.html#method.define ?

Reviewer 2: Yes, but maybe it should refer to [`rustc_codegen_ssa::base::codegen_instance`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_codegen_ssa/base/fn.codegen_instance.html) instead. That function is called by `MonoItem::define`, when the `MonoItem` is a function.

in turn in this chapter, and in the rest of the guide, we will look at all the
individual pieces in more detail.

## What the compiler does to your code

So first, let's look at what the compiler does to your code. For now, we will
avoid mentioning how the compiler implements these steps except as needed;
we'll talk about that later.

**TODO: Would be great to have a diagram of this once we nail down the details...**

**TODO: someone else should confirm this vvv**

- User writes a program and invokes `rustc` on it (possibly through `cargo`).
- First, we parse command line flags, etc. This is done in [`librustc_driver`].
  We now know what the exact work is we need to do (e.g. which nightly features
  are enabled, whether we are doing a `check`-only build or emiting LLVM-IR or
  a full compilation).
- Then, we start to do compilation...
- We first [_lex_ the user program][lex]. This turns the program into a stream
  of _tokens_ (yes, the same sort of tokens as `proc_macros` (sort of)).
  [`StringReader`] from [`librustc_parse`] integrates [`librustc_lexer`] with
  `rustc` data structures.
- We then [_parse_ the stream of tokens][parser] to build an Abstract Syntax

>   Tree (AST).

Reviewer: Added bullet points for these topics in https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/659.

  breaking programs that previously compiled despite the many changes that are
  always going on to its implementation.
- Limitations of other tools: rustc uses LLVM in its backend, and LLVM has some
  strengths we leverage and some limitations/weaknesses we need to work around.
- And others that I'm probably forgetting.

So, as you read through the rest of the guide, keep these things in mind. They
will often inform decisions that we make.

### Constant change

One thing to keep in mind is that `rustc` is a real production-quality product.
As such, it has its fair share of codebase churn and technical debt. A lot of
the designs discussed throughout this guide are idealized designs that are not
fully realized yet. And things keep changing so that it is hard to keep this
guide completely up to date on everything!

The compiler definitely has rough edges, but because of its design it is able
to keep up with the requirements above.

### Intermediate representations

As with most compilers, `rustc` uses some intermediate representations (IRs) to
facilitate computations. In general, working directly with the source code is

> extremely inconvenient. Source code is designed to be human-friendly while at

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
extremely inconvenient and error-prone. Source code is designed to be human-friendly while at
```

the same time being unambiguous, but it's less convenient for doing something
like, say, type checking.

Instead most compilers, including `rustc`, build some sort of IR out of the
source code which is easier to analyze. `rustc` has a few IRs, each optimized

> for different things:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for different purposes:
```

> - Abstract Syntax Tree (AST): the abstract syntax tree is built from the stream

Reviewer 4: We can consider the stream of tokens as an IR in its own right.

Author: Hmm... I guess I have always had this mental model of "Lexing and Parsing" being one large black box. To what extent is there a clean separation in the code?

  of tokens produced by the lexer directly from the source code. It represents
  pretty much exactly what the user wrote. It helps to do some syntactic sanity
  checking (e.g. checking that a type is expected where the user wrote one).

> - High-level IR (HIR): This is a sort of very desugared AST. It's still close

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- High-level IR (HIR): This is a sort of desugared AST. It's still close
```
It's not that desugared tbh.

  to what the user wrote syntactically, but it includes some implicit things
  such as some elided lifetimes, etc. This IR is amenable to type checking.
- HAIR: This is an intermediate between HIR and MIR. This only exists to make

>   it easier to lower HIR to MIR.

Reviewer 4: It also exists to do exhaustiveness checking for the pattern fragment. Worthy of mention here is that this AST is explicitly typed and e.g., method calls and implicit derefs are made explicit.

- Middle-level IR (MIR): This IR is basically a Control-Flow Graph (CFG). A CFG
  is a type of diagram that shows the basic blocks of a program and how control
  flow can go between them. Likewise, MIR also has a bunch of basic blocks with
  simple typed statements inside them (e.g. assignment, simple computations,

>   dropping values, etc). MIR is used for borrow checking and a bunch of other

Reviewer 4: Drop is a terminator though.

Author: Yeah, this sentence is a bit imprecise. I'm wondering how much to say about the structure of MIR here...

>   dropping values, etc). MIR is used for borrow checking and a bunch of other

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  dropping values, etc). MIR is used for borrow checking and other
```
(general note: try reducing the wordiness of "a bunch" et. al in various places)

  important dataflow based checks, such as checking for uninitialized values.

>   It is also used for a bunch of optimizations and for constant evaluation (via

Reviewer 4: "a bunch" again

Author: "many"?

>   MIRI). Because MIR is still generic, we can do a lot of analyses here more

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Miri). Because MIR is still generic, we can do a lot of analyses here more
```

Author: I thought it was an acronym "MIR Interpreter"? cc @oli-obk

  efficiently than after monomorphization.
- LLVM IR: This is the standard form of all input to the LLVM compiler. LLVM IR

>   is basically a sort of typed assembly language with lots of annotations. It's

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  is a sort of typed assembly language with lots of annotations. It's
```

  a standard format that is used by all compilers that use LLVM (e.g. the clang
  C compiler also outputs LLVM IR). LLVM IR is designed to be easy for other
  compilers to emit and also rich enough for LLVM to run a bunch of
  optimizations on it.

### Queries

The first big implementation choice is the _query_ system. The rust compiler
uses a query system which is unlike most textbook compilers, which are
organized as a series of passes over the code that execute sequentially. The
compiler does this to make incremental compilation possible -- that is, if the
user makes a change to their program and recompiles, we want to do as little
redundant work as possible to produce the new binary.

> In rustc, all the major steps above are organized as a bunch of queries that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In `rustc`, all the major steps above are organized as a bunch of queries that
```

call each other. For example, there is a query to ask for the type of something

> and another to ask for the optimized MIR of a function, and so on. These

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and another to ask for the optimized MIR of a function. These
```

queries can call each other and are all tracked through the query system, and

> the results of the queries are cached on disk so that we can tell which

Reviewer 4: Long sentence.

to ask for the LLVM IR for that HIR. This drives the generation of optimized
MIR, which drives the borrow checker, which drives the generation of MIR, and
so on.

... except that this is very over-simplified. In fact, some queries are not
cached on disk, and some parts of the compiler have to run for all code anyway
for correctness even if the code is dead code (e.g. the borrow checker). For
example, [currently the `mir_borrowck` query is first executed on all functions
of a crate.][passes] Then the codegen backend invokes the
`collect_and_partition_mono_items` query, which first recursively requests the
`optimized_mir` for all reachable functions, which in turn runs `mir_borrowck`
for that function and then creates codegen units. This kind of split will need
to remain to ensure that unreachable functions still have their errors emitted.

[passes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/45ebd5808afd3df7ba842797c0fcd4447ddf30fb/src/librustc_interface/passes.rs#L824

Moreover, the compiler wasn't originally built to use a query system; the query
system has been retrofitted into the compiler, so parts of it are not

> query-fied yet. Also, LLVM isn't our code, so obviously that isn't querified

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
query-fied yet. Also, LLVM isn't our code, so that isn't querified
```
Nothing is ever obvious. :)

either. The plan is to eventually query-fy all of the steps listed in the
previous section, but as of this writing, only the steps between HIR and
LLVM-IR are query-fied. That is, lexing and parsing are done all at once for
the whole program.

> One other thing to mention here is the all-important "typing context",

Reviewer 4: It's massively confusing to call this the "typing context" -- It doesn't actually correspond to some `Γ` or `Δ` in the sense of typing rules.

Author: Yep, I very much agree, but that's what it's called in the source (I think for historical reasons). We should add a note about this here.

[`TyCtxt`], which is a giant struct that is at the center of all things. All
queries are defined as methods on the [`TyCtxt`] type, and the in-memory query
cache is stored there too. In the code, there is usually a variable called
`tcx` which is a handle on the typing context. You will also see lifetimes with
the name `'tcx`, which means that something is tied to the lifetime of the

> `TyCtxt` (usually it is stored or _interned_ there).

Reviewer 4: maybe mention "arena" here :)

Author: Hmmm... this is another place where we talk about interning with defining it.

[`TyCtxt`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc/ty/struct.TyCtxt.html

### `ty::Ty`

Types are really important in Rust, and they form the core of a lot of compiler
analyses. The main type (in the compiler) that represents types (in the user's
program) is [`rustc::ty::Ty`][ty]. This is so important that we have a whole chapter
on [`ty::Ty`][ty], but for now, we just want to mention that it exists and is the way
`rustc` represents types!

Oh, and also the `rustc::ty` module defines the `TyCtxt` struct we mentioned before.

[ty]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc/ty/type.Ty.html

### Parallelism

> Compiler performance is a problem that we would very much like to improve on

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Compiler performance is a problem that we would like to improve on
```

> (and are always working on). One aspect of that is attempting to parallelize

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
(and are always working on). One aspect of that is parallelizing
```

`rustc` itself.

> Currently, there is only one part of rustc that is already parallel: codegen.

Reviewer 4: cc @Zoxc

During monomorphization, the compiler will split up all the code to be
generated into smaller chunks called _codegen units_. These are then generated
by independent instances of LLVM. Since they are independent, we can run them
in parallel. At the end, the linker is run to combine all the codegen units
together into one binary.

However, the rest of the compiler is still not yet parallel. There have been
lots of efforts spent on this, but it is generally a hard problem. The current
approach is (**TODO: verify**) to turn `RefCell`s into `Mutex`s -- that is, we
switch to thread-safe internal mutability. However, there are ongoing
challenges with lock contention, maintaining query-system invariants under
concurrency, and the complexity of the code base. One can try out the current
work by enabling parallel compilation in `config.toml`. It's still early days,
but there are already some promising performance improvements.

### Bootstrapping

> **TODO (or do we want such a section)?**

Reviewer 4: Yes. :)

Author: Good to know! Do you have specific things you think we should mention?

Author: I added a bit. Let me know what you think.

  parser, HIR, etc)? - e.g., `cargo rustc -- -Zunpretty=hir-tree` allows you to
  view HIR representation
- What is the main source entry point for `X`?
- Where do phases diverge for cross-compilation to machine  code across
  different platforms?

# References

- Command line parsing
    - Guide: [The Rustc Driver and Interface](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/rustc-driver.html)
    - Driver definition: [`rustc_driver`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_driver/)
    - Main entry point: **TODO**
- Lexical Analysis: Lex the user program to a stream of tokens
    - Guide: [Lexing and Parsing](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/the-parser.html)
    - Lexer definition: [`librustc_lexer`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_lexer/index.html)
    - Main entry point: **TODO**
- Parsing: Parse the stream of tokens to an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)
    - Guide: [Lexing and Parsing](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/the-parser.html)
    - Parser definition: [`librustc_parse`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/index.html)
    - Main entry point: **TODO**

>     - AST definition: [`librustc_ast`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_ast/ast/index.html)

Reviewer 4: Expansion, nameres, ast validation, and feature gating, and early linting should probably be mentioned here.

> - The High Level Intermediate Representation (HIR)

Reviewer 4: Something something late linting...

      representations of source are turned into an executable binary. `rustc`
      uses LLVM for code generation.  The first step is the MIR is then
      converted to LLVM Intermediate Representation (LLVM IR). This is where
      the MIR is actually monomorphized, according to the list we created in
      the previous step.
    - The LLVM IR is passed to LLVM, which does a lot more optimizations on it.
      It then emits machine code. It is basically assembly code with additional
      low-level types and annotations added. (e.g. an ELF object or wasm).
      **TODO: reference for this section?**
    - The different libraries/binaries are linked together to produce the final
      binary. **TODO: reference for this section?**

[`librustc_lexer`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_lexer/index.html
[`librustc_driver`]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/rustc-driver.html
[lex]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rustc-guide/the-parser.html
[`StringReader`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/lexer/struct.StringReader.html
[`librustc_parse`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/index.html

> [parser]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_lexer/index.html

Reviewer 6: Not sure if we wanted to link to https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/index.html here?

> [hir]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_lexer/index.html

Reviewer 6: This should point to https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_hir/index.html instead

(and are always working on). One aspect of that is attempting to parallelize
`rustc` itself.

Currently, there is only one part of rustc that is already parallel: codegen.
During monomorphization, the compiler will split up all the code to be
generated into smaller chunks called _codegen units_. These are then generated
by independent instances of LLVM. Since they are independent, we can run them
in parallel. At the end, the linker is run to combine all the codegen units
together into one binary.

However, the rest of the compiler is still not yet parallel. There have been
lots of efforts spent on this, but it is generally a hard problem. The current
approach is (**TODO: verify**) to turn `RefCell`s into `Mutex`s -- that is, we
switch to thread-safe internal mutability. However, there are ongoing
challenges with lock contention, maintaining query-system invariants under
concurrency, and the complexity of the code base. One can try out the current
work by enabling parallel compilation in `config.toml`. It's still early days,
but there are already some promising performance improvements.

### Bootstrapping

**TODO (or do we want such a section)?**

> ## A flow chart or walkthrough diagram

Reviewer: Is this a duplicate of the diagram above?

- The raw Rust source text is analyzed by a low-level lexer located in
  [`librustc_lexer`]. At this stage, the source text is turned into a stream of
  atomic source code units known as _tokens_. (**TODO**: chrissimpkins - Maybe
  discuss Unicode handling during this stage?)
- The token stream passes through a higher-level lexer located in
  [`librustc_parse`] to prepare for the next stage of the compile process. The
  [`StringReader`] struct is used at this stage to perform a set of validations
  and turn strings into interned symbols.
- (**TODO**: chrissimpkins - Expand info on parser) We then [_parse_ the stream
  of tokens][parser] to build an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).
  - macro expansion (**TODO** chrissimpkins)
  - ast validation (**TODO** chrissimpkins)
  - nameres (**TODO** chrissimpkins)
  - early linting (**TODO** chrissimpkins)

- We then take the AST and [convert it to High-Level Intermediate
  Representation (HIR)][hir]. This is a compiler-friendly representation of the
  AST.  This involves a lot of desugaring of things like loops and `async fn`.
- We use the HIR to do [type inference]. This is the process of automatic

>   detection of the type of an expression. **TODO: how `ty` module fits in

Author: I think we can drop this TODO, as we discuss `ty` down below.

  here**
- **TODO: Maybe some other things are done here? I think initial type checking
  happens here? And trait solving?**
- The HIR is then [lowered to Mid-Level Intermediate Representation (MIR)][mir].
  - Along the way, we construct the HAIR, which is an even more desugared HIR.
    HAIR is used for pattern and exhaustiveness checking. It is also more

>     convenient to convert into MIR than HIR is.

Reviewer 7: I liked how @eddyb has explained HAIR here https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/182449-t-compiler.2Fhelp/topic/history.20of.20typeck.20and.20borrowck. Maybe @eddyb has more thoughts about the Overview :).

Reviewer 7: Saw that down here https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/633/files#diff-c872a24fac64fbf63e412eb49ccf468aR175 some of the things said in that Zulip topic were included.

Author: added to followup issue

the same time being unambiguous, but it's less convenient for doing something
like, say, type checking.

Instead most compilers, including `rustc`, build some sort of IR out of the
source code which is easier to analyze. `rustc` has a few IRs, each optimized
for different purposes:

- Token stream: the lexer produces a stream of tokens directly from the source
  code. This stream of tokens is easier for the parser to deal with than raw
  text.
- Abstract Syntax Tree (AST): the abstract syntax tree is built from the stream
  of tokens produced by the lexer. It represents
  pretty much exactly what the user wrote. It helps to do some syntactic sanity
  checking (e.g. checking that a type is expected where the user wrote one).
- High-level IR (HIR): This is a sort of desugared AST. It's still close
  to what the user wrote syntactically, but it includes some implicit things
  such as some elided lifetimes, etc. This IR is amenable to type checking.
- HAIR: This is an intermediate between HIR and MIR. It is like the HIR but it
  is fully typed and a bit more desugared (e.g. method calls and implicit
  dereferences are made fully explicit). Moreover, it is easier to lower to MIR

>   than HIR.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  from HAIR than from HIR.
```

  simple typed statements inside them (e.g. assignment, simple computations,
  etc) and control flow edges to other basic blocks (e.g., calls, dropping
  values). MIR is used for borrow checking and other
  important dataflow-based checks, such as checking for uninitialized values.
  It is also used for a series of optimizations and for constant evaluation (via
  MIRI). Because MIR is still generic, we can do a lot of analyses here more
  efficiently than after monomorphization.
- LLVM IR: This is the standard form of all input to the LLVM compiler. LLVM IR
  is a sort of typed assembly language with lots of annotations. It's
  a standard format that is used by all compilers that use LLVM (e.g. the clang
  C compiler also outputs LLVM IR). LLVM IR is designed to be easy for other
  compilers to emit and also rich enough for LLVM to run a bunch of
  optimizations on it.

### Queries

The first big implementation choice is the _query_ system. The rust compiler
uses a query system which is unlike most textbook compilers, which are
organized as a series of passes over the code that execute sequentially. The

> compiler does this to make incremental compilation possible -- that is, if the

Reviewer 7: Is this the only reason to use a query system? I think it's also a better design.

Author: It's a fair question. Incremental was the reason I kept hearing.

Author: added to followup issue

in parallel. At the end, the linker is run to combine all the codegen units
together into one binary.

However, the rest of the compiler is still not yet parallel. There have been
lots of efforts spent on this, but it is generally a hard problem. The current
approach is (**TODO: verify**) to turn `RefCell`s into `Mutex`s -- that is, we
switch to thread-safe internal mutability. However, there are ongoing
challenges with lock contention, maintaining query-system invariants under
concurrency, and the complexity of the code base. One can try out the current
work by enabling parallel compilation in `config.toml`. It's still early days,
but there are already some promising performance improvements.

### Bootstrapping

`rustc` itself is written in Rust. So how do we compile the compiler? We use an
older compiler to compile the newer compiler. This is called _bootstrapping_.

Bootstrapping has a lot of interesting implications. For example, it means that one
of the major users of Rust is Rust, so we are constantly testing our own
software ("eating our own dogfood"). Also, it means building the compiler can
take a long time because one must first build the compiler and then use that to

> build the new compiler (sometimes you can get away without the full 2-stage

Reviewer 7: I guess people may be confused if they've never thought about this on the why this needs to be built twice. What if without a lot of detail we explain that in the first build you're compiling your program and second build is like you're executing your program.

Author: The explanation in the other chapter makes sense, but it's a bit long. Basically, the point is that we want to end up with a new compiler built with the new compiler. So the first stage is to compile the new compiler with the old compiler, and then we use stage 1 to build the new compiler again.

Reviewer 7: @mark-i-m yeah, I know but the thing is how to briefly explain this without saying things that readers may not comprehend, hmmm. I kind of like the idea of stage 1 compile your "program", stage 2 execute your "program", the thing is that your "program" is a compiler which is what entangles all this. :/

Author: @spastorino Hmm... I guess, I don't quite see what you are getting at. stage 2 is also compiling no?

Author: added to followup issue

build, but for release artifacts you need the 2-stage build).

Bootstrapping also has implications for when features are usable in the
compiler itself. The build system uses the current beta compiler to build the
stage-1 bootstrapping compiler. This means that the compiler source code can't
use some features until they reach beta (because otherwise the beta compiler

> doesn't support them). On the other hand, for compiler intrinsics and internal

Reviewer 7: Hmm, wouldn't people read this and don't understand what intrinsics are?.

Author: Possibly, but it's a standard compilers term, I think, so we can include it in the glossary perhaps?

Reviewer 7: :+1:, glossary and link from here to the glossary?.

features, we may be able to use them immediately because the stage-1

> bootstrapping compiler will support them.

Reviewer 7: Also unsure if this has the right context to be understood.

Author: added to followup issue

  LLVM-IR rather than executable machine code. The `rustc` executable call may
  be indirect through the use of `cargo`.
- Command line argument parsing occurs in the [`librustc_driver`]. This crate
  defines the compile configuration that is requested by the user and passes it
  to the rest of the compilation process as a [`rustc_interface::Config`].
- The raw Rust source text is analyzed by a low-level lexer located in
  [`librustc_lexer`]. At this stage, the source text is turned into a stream of
  atomic source code units known as _tokens_.  The lexer supports the
  Unicode character encoding.
- The token stream passes through a higher-level lexer located in
  [`librustc_parse`] to prepare for the next stage of the compile process. The
  [`StringReader`] struct is used at this stage to perform a set of validations
  and turn strings into interned symbols (_interning_ is discussed later).
- The lexer has a small interface and doesn't depend directly on the
  diagnostic infrastructure in `rustc`. Instead it provides diagnostics as plain
  data which are emitted in `librustc_parse::lexer::mod` as real diagnostics.

> - The lexer preseves full fidelity information for both IDEs and proc macros.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- The lexer preserves full fidelity information for both IDEs and proc macros.
```

older compiler to compile the newer compiler. This is called _bootstrapping_.

Bootstrapping has a lot of interesting implications. For example, it means that
one of the major users of Rust is Rust, so we are constantly testing our own
software ("eating our own dogfood"). Also, it means building the compiler can
take a long time because one must first build the new compiler with an older
compiler and then use that to build the new compiler with itself (sometimes you
can get away without the full 2-stage build, but for release artifacts you need
the 2-stage build).

Bootstrapping also has implications for when features are usable in the
compiler itself. The build system uses the current beta compiler to build the
stage-1 bootstrapping compiler. This means that the compiler source code can't
use some features until they reach beta (because otherwise the beta compiler
doesn't support them). On the other hand, for [compiler intrinsics][intrinsics]
and internal features, we may be able to use them immediately because the
stage-1 bootstrapping compiler will support them.

[intrinsics]: ./appendix/glossary.md#intrinsic

# Unresolved Questions

> 

Reviewer 3: There are two lines here, unlike the rest of the document.
```suggestion
```

- Does LLVM ever do optimizations in debug builds?
- How do I explore phases of the compile process in my own sources (lexer,
  parser, HIR, etc)? - e.g., `cargo rustc -- -Zunpretty=hir-tree` allows you to
  view HIR representation
- What is the main source entry point for `X`?

> - Where do phases diverge for cross-compilation to machine  code across

Reviewer 3: There is a trailing space here :eyes:
```suggestion
- Where do phases diverge for cross-compilation to machine code across
```

Author: I'll make a new PR for these

# Overview of the Compiler

This chapter is about the overall process of compiling a program -- how
everything fits together.

The rust compiler is special in two ways: it does things to your code that
other compilers don't do (e.g. borrow checking) and it has a lot of
unconventional implementation choices (e.g. queries). We will talk about these
in turn in this chapter, and in the rest of the guide, we will look at all the
individual pieces in more detail.

## What the compiler does to your code

So first, let's look at what the compiler does to your code. For now, we will
avoid mentioning how the compiler implements these steps except as needed;
we'll talk about that later.

> **TODO: Would be great to have a diagram of this once we nail down the details...**

Reviewer: This line should be removed before the merge
```suggestion

```

  `parse_*` methods can be found in `librustc_parse` `parser` directory. The source
  file name follows the construct name. For example, the following files are found
  in the parser:
    - `expr.rs`
    - `pat.rs`
    - `ty.rs`
    - `stmt.rs`
- This naming scheme is used across many compiler stages. You will find
  either a file or directory with the same name across the parsing, lowering,
  type checking, HAIR lowering, and MIR building sources.
- Macro expansion, AST validation, name resolution, and early linting takes place
  during this stage of the compile process.
- The parser uses the standard `DiagnosticBuilder` API for error handling, but we
  try to recover, parsing a superset of Rust's grammar, while also emitting an error.
- `rustc_ast::ast::{Crate, Mod, Expr, Pat, ...}` AST nodes are returned from the parser.
- We then take the AST and [convert it to High-Level Intermediate
  Representation (HIR)][hir]. This is a compiler-friendly representation of the
  AST.  This involves a lot of desugaring of things like loops and `async fn`.
- We use the HIR to do [type inference]. This is the process of automatic
  detection of the type of an expression.

> - **TODO: Maybe some other things are done here? I think initial type checking

Reviewer: Should be confirmed and removed before merge
```suggestion

```

Author: added to the followup issue

  happens here? And trait solving?**
- The HIR is then [lowered to Mid-Level Intermediate Representation (MIR)][mir].
  - Along the way, we construct the HAIR, which is an even more desugared HIR.
    HAIR is used for pattern and exhaustiveness checking. It is also more
    convenient to convert into MIR than HIR is.
- The MIR is used for [borrow checking].

> - **TODO: const eval fits in somewhere here I think**

Reviewer: Should be confirmed and removed before merge
```suggestion

```

Author: added to the followup issue

- We (want to) do [many optimizations on the MIR][mir-opt] because it is still
  generic and that improves the code we generate later, improving compilation

>   speed too. (**TODO: size optimizations too?**)

Reviewer: Should be removed before merge
```suggestion
  speed too.
```

Author: added to the followup issue

    some optimizations at MIR level than at LLVM-IR level. For example LLVM
    doesn't seem to be able to optimize the pattern the [`simplify_try`] mir
    opt looks for.
- Rust code is _monomorphized_, which means making copies of all the generic
  code with the type parameters replaced by concrete types. To do
  this, we need to collect a list of what concrete types to generate code for.
  This is called _monomorphization collection_.
- We then begin what is vaguely called _code generation_ or _codegen_.
  - The [code generation stage (codegen)][codegen] is when higher level
    representations of source are turned into an executable binary. `rustc`
      uses LLVM for code generation.  The first step is the MIR is then
    converted to LLVM Intermediate Representation (LLVM IR). This is where
    the MIR is actually monomorphized, according to the list we created in
    the previous step.
  - The LLVM IR is passed to LLVM, which does a lot more optimizations on it.
    It then emits machine code. It is basically assembly code with additional
    low-level types and annotations added. (e.g. an ELF object or wasm).

>     **TODO: reference for this section?**

Reviewer: Remove before merge
```suggestion

```

  - The different libraries/binaries are linked together to produce the final

>     binary. **TODO: reference for this section?**

Reviewer: Remove before merge
```suggestion
    binary.
```

[lex]: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/the-parser.html
[`StringReader`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/lexer/struct.StringReader.html
[`librustc_parse`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/index.html
[parser]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/index.html
[hir]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_hir/index.html
[type inference]: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/type-inference.html
[mir]: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/mir/index.html
[borrow checking]: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/borrow_check.html
[mir-opt]: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/mir/optimizations.html
[`simplify_try`]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/66282
[codegen]: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/backend/codegen.html

## How it does it

Ok, so now that we have a high-level view of what the compiler does to your
code, let's take a high-level view of _how_ it does all that stuff. There are a
lot of constraints and conflicting goals that the compiler needs to
satisfy/optimize for. For example,

> - Compilation speed: how fast is it to compile a program. More/better

Reviewer: Maybe we can remove "Compilation", "Compiler" from these bullet points?  There is a lot of repetition and I don't know that it needs to be stated in each case?
```suggestion
- Speed: how fast is it to compile a program. More/better
```

Author: I think it is important to say that we are talking about the compiler here: do you mean the speed of the compiler or the speed of the compiled program or the speed of compiling the compiler?

Likewise for the others...

  compile-time analyses often means compilation is slower.
  - Also, we want to support incremental compilation, so we need to take that
    into account. How can we keep track of what work needs to be redone and
    what can be reused if the user modifies their program?
    - Also we can't store too much stuff in the incremental cache because
      it would take a long time to load from disk and it could take a lot
      of space on the user's system...

> - Compiler memory usage: while compiling a program, we don't want to use more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Memory usage: while compiling a program, we don't want to use more
```

  memory than we need.
- Program speed: how fast is your compiled program. More/better compile-time
  analyses often means the compiler can do better optimizations.
- Program size: how large is the compiled binary? Similar to the previous
  point.

> - Compiler compilation speed: how long does it take to compile the compiler?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Compilation speed: how long does it take to compile the compiler?
```

  This impacts contributors and compiler maintenance.

> - Compiler implementation complexity: building a compiler is one of the hardest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implementation complexity: building a compiler is one of the hardest
```

  things a person/group can do, and Rust is not a very simple language, so how
  do we make the compiler's code base manageable?

> - Compiler correctness: the binaries produced by the compiler should do what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Correctness: the binaries produced by the compiler should do what
```

  the input programs says they do, and should continue to do so despite the
  tremendous amount of change constantly going on.

> - Compiler integration: a number of other tools need to use the compiler in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Integration: a number of other tools need to use the compiler in
```

  various ways (e.g. cargo, clippy, miri, RLS) that must be supported.

> - Compiler stability: the compiler should not crash or fail ungracefully on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Stability: the compiler should not crash or fail ungracefully on the
```

  stable channel.

> - Rust stability: the compiler must respect rust's stability guarantees by not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Rust stability: the compiler must respect Rust's stability guarantees by not
```

One other thing to mention here is the all-important "typing context",
[`TyCtxt`], which is a giant struct that is at the center of all things.
(Note that the name is mostly historic. This is _not_ a "typing context" in the
sense of `Γ` or `Δ` from type theory. The name is retained because that's what
the name of the struct is in the source code.) All
queries are defined as methods on the [`TyCtxt`] type, and the in-memory query
cache is stored there too. In the code, there is usually a variable called
`tcx` which is a handle on the typing context. You will also see lifetimes with
the name `'tcx`, which means that something is tied to the lifetime of the
`TyCtxt` (usually it is stored or interned there).

[`TyCtxt`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/ty/struct.TyCtxt.html

### `ty::Ty`

Types are really important in Rust, and they form the core of a lot of compiler
analyses. The main type (in the compiler) that represents types (in the user's
program) is [`rustc::ty::Ty`][ty]. This is so important that we have a whole chapter
on [`ty::Ty`][ty], but for now, we just want to mention that it exists and is the way
`rustc` represents types!

> Oh, and also the `rustc::ty` module defines the `TyCtxt` struct we mentioned before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also note that the `rustc::ty` module defines the `TyCtxt` struct we mentioned before.
```

[ty]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/ty/type.Ty.html

### Parallelism

Compiler performance is a problem that we would like to improve on
(and are always working on). One aspect of that is parallelizing
`rustc` itself.

Currently, there is only one part of rustc that is already parallel: codegen.
During monomorphization, the compiler will split up all the code to be
generated into smaller chunks called _codegen units_. These are then generated
by independent instances of LLVM. Since they are independent, we can run them
in parallel. At the end, the linker is run to combine all the codegen units
together into one binary.

However, the rest of the compiler is still not yet parallel. There have been
lots of efforts spent on this, but it is generally a hard problem. The current

> approach is (**TODO: verify**) to turn `RefCell`s into `Mutex`s -- that is, we

Reviewer: Verify and remove TODO
```suggestion
approach is to turn `RefCell`s into `Mutex`s -- that is, we
```

### Bootstrapping

`rustc` itself is written in Rust. So how do we compile the compiler? We use an
older compiler to compile the newer compiler. This is called _bootstrapping_.

Bootstrapping has a lot of interesting implications. For example, it means that
one of the major users of Rust is Rust, so we are constantly testing our own
software ("eating our own dogfood"). Also, it means building the compiler can
take a long time because one must first build the new compiler with an older
compiler and then use that to build the new compiler with itself (sometimes you
can get away without the full 2-stage build, but for release artifacts you need
the 2-stage build).

Bootstrapping also has implications for when features are usable in the
compiler itself. The build system uses the current beta compiler to build the
stage-1 bootstrapping compiler. This means that the compiler source code can't
use some features until they reach beta (because otherwise the beta compiler
doesn't support them). On the other hand, for compiler intrinsics and internal
features, we may be able to use them immediately because the stage-1
bootstrapping compiler will support them.

# Unresolved Questions

> **TODO: find answers to these**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

**TODO: someone else should confirm this vvv**

- The compile process begins when a user writes a Rust source program in text and invokes the `rustc` compiler on it. The work that the compiler needs to perform is defined by command-line options. For example, it is possible to enable nightly features (`-Z` flags), perform `check`-only builds, or emit LLVM-IR rather than executable machine code. The `rustc` executable call may be indirect through the use of `cargo`.
- Command line argument parsing occurs in the [`librustc_driver`]. This crate defines the compile configuration that is requested by the user and passes it to the rest of the compilation process as a [`rustc_interface::Config`].

> - The raw Rust source text is analyzed by a low-level lexer located in [`librustc_lexer`]. At this stage, the source text is turned into a stream of atomic source code units known as _tokens_. (**TODO**: chrissimpkins - Maybe discuss Unicode handling during this stage?)

Author: @chrissimpkins is there anything specific you had in mind, or would saying "we handle unicode codepoint here" be sufficient?

Reviewer: This is an area of interest for me and maybe not necessary in the Overview.  I am trying to understand the Unicode handling in Rust.  I came across `librustc_parse::lexer::unicode_chars` and thought that it might be interesting to add a comment about Unicode support.  If it doesn't work here I will see if I can work it into the Guide chapter once I understand it.

Reviewer: Agree with you.  I added a simple statement about Unicode support in 55e61ed8408d41302368683868bc47883e520b4f (#669)

Author: cherry-picked this commit.
